# Information Retrieval Project

This is a project for the Information Retrieval course (CSE-508) offered at IIIT Delhi, which aims to develop and evaluate techniques for lexical text simplification and detoxification. The project investigates the challenges of developing effective simplification techniques that accurately preserve the meaning and intended tone and style of the original text. The project also explores methods for detecting and detoxifying offensive text. The results of the project are presented in Jupyter Notebook files and a report for the mid-project evaluation, along with files related to deploying the models through a user-friendly web interface.

## Directory Structure
The directory structure for this repository is as follows:

### IR_Project_2023
1. Baseline_Results_Folder
    - Lexical_Text_Simplification.ipynb
    - Detoxification.ipynb

2. Mid_project_Review
    - Mid_Project_Report.pdf
    - Lexical_Text_Simplification.ipynb
    - Detoxification.ipynb

3. Website_files

4. Project_proposal.pdf

5. LICENSE

6. README.md

* Baseline_Results_Folder/ - Contains two Jupyter Notebook files that demonstrate the baseline results for lexical text simplification and detoxification techniques.
* Mid_project_Review/ - Contains a report for the mid-project evaluation along with two Jupyter Notebook files with updated codes for lexical text simplification and detoxification.
* Website_files/ - Contains all the files that are required for deploying the models through a user-friendly web interface.
project_proposal.pdf - Contains the project proposal for the Information Retrieval Project of 2023.
* LICENSE - Contains the license agreement for the project.
* README.md - Contains the instructions for installing, running, and using the project, along with the directory structure for the repository.

## Lexical Text Simplification

The proposed solution for lexical text simplification involves these main steps: 
* Firstly, complex words in the sentence are identified using the difficult_words function from the textstat library. 
* Secondly, the identified word is masked and replaced using the masked language modeling feature provided by BERT, and a list of the most appropriate words that can replace the masked word is generated. Best 2 replacement words for each complex word are chosen using zipf frequency and similarity to original word.
* Finally in case of multiple complex sentences in a word, all possible permutations of the list containing the best 2 replacement words for the complex words are considered. Sentences corresponding to these permutation are generated. Best sentence is chosen using zipf frequency and cosine similairty to original sentence.
* If sentence contains less than 6 words then use simple synonym replacement as not enough context  

## Detoxification
As part of our model, we developed a model that performs the following tasks: 
* It detects whether a sentence or comment contains toxic content
* It catgorizes the toxic words in the comment which are replaced by their closest meaning, considerably less toxic sysnonyms to make itsuitable for readers of all ages. 
* To classify the text, we employed a machine learning algorithm that uses word vector embeddings generated by Word2Vec. We experimented with several ML models and the Jigsaw dataset was used for training the model. 
* After synonym replacement, we paraphrase the sentence to bring it closer to its original meaning (thus retaining context).

## Instructions
Clone the repository using the following command: git clone https://github.com/apoorva-aa/IR_Project_2023.git

## Contributors 
- Aanya Trehan (2020419)
- Abhimanyu Bhatnagar (2020273) 
- Aniket Goel (2020281)
- Apoorva Arya (2020032)   
- Naman Kaushik (2020088)
- Sejal Kardam (2020467)
            	            
